	Secretary Rumsfeld claims in his memoir that early discussions with Turkish officials over the planned invasion left the Bush administration with confidence that they [the Turkish parliament] would grant us the approval we sought, stating that no one had anticipated that the vote might fail. Aside from the history of the US-Turkish relationship, US-Turkish cooperation in the war on terror and early Turkish receptivity to the invasion plan seem to have led US officials to believe that Turkish support could be secured. Turkish support for the US mission in Afghanistan was expressed clearly to the United States when Rumsfeld met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, the Turkish Foreign and Defense Ministers, and the Turkish military chief on October 5, 2001. An idealized notion of the history of the US-Turkish relationship seems to have convinced some in the Bush administration that securing Turkish cooperation for the 2003 invasion would be simple. A focus on multilateralism would have helped win over the Turkish public and diminished fears that supporting the United States would lead Turkey to be alienated by the international community. Powells positions on troop levels, the invasion timetable, and the wisdom of pushing for Turkish cooperation were never seriously considered by General Franks or Secretary Rumsfeld. The last time the United States invaded Iraq, notes Cheney, Turkey had complied with US requests. Rumsfeld cites the history of US-Turkish relations since the Korean War, optimistic assurances from our diplomatic corps, and Turkish support of Americas operation in Afghanistan as reasons for believing that Turkish cooperation could be secured. The United States and Turkey did, in fact, enjoy a close military relationship for a sustained period of time. Turkey pledged to provide military training for forces in northern Afghanistan, promising to cooperate with the United States with all of our facilities. An invasion conducted in accordance with Powells more conservative military philosophy would have had profound implications for the US approach to negotiations with Turkey. Yet, US-Turkish cooperation during this period should not have been interpreted as a clear indication of Turkish willingness to aid in the invasion of Iraq. Thus, for the invasion of Iraq, Rumsfeld pushed military planners to devise a strategy that involved as few troops and as little time for deployment as possible. In the post-Cold War period, despite the efforts of Greek and Armenian interest groups in the United States, and other minor points of friction, Turkey and the United States appeared to remain close. Turkeys acquiescence to most American requests (including the use of Turkish bases and the deployment of over 100,000 Turkish troops to the Iraqi border) may appear to have marked a continuation of the two countries traditionally strong bilateral relationship. Franks declared that US officials would turn it up until they [Turkey] realize what is at stake is the next two generations of Turks. Powell, and other notable military officials, including General Eric Shinseki, believed that deploying significantly more forces would be a safer plan for both the initial invasion and in the reconstruction phase. Additionally, operating on the basis of a more flexible timetable would have eliminated the need for the United States to rush headlong into the chaotic, post-election Turkish political environment. On the eve of US-Turkish negotiations over the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the aftermath of the Gulf War weighed heavily on the minds of Turkish negotiators. With Turkey taking an active role in most of the post-Cold War peace operations led either by the United Nations or by NATO, the relationship appeared sound. It is true that Turkey cooperated quite enthusiastically with the United States in Afghanistan. At this meeting, Turkish officials characterized the Taliban as a menace to Islam, Turkey and the world, declaring that it would be wrong to let this cruel regime in Afghanistan continue. The disagreement over the necessity of Turkey as a staging ground fit into the broader clash between Powell and Rumsfeld over the proper structure of the military and of the appropriate timing of the invasion. Similarly, when asked how many troops he felt would be appropriate for the invasion during a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing, General Shinseki controversially stated that several hundred thousand would be needed. Many leaders in parliament and officers in the Turkish military were hesitant to put aside Turkeys traditional policy of non-interference in intraregional conflicts in the Middle East, viewing Operation Desert Storm as an adventurist policy. 