
US officials began hinting at the possibility of invasion in March 2002, with Vice President Cheney’s visit to Ankara as part of a broader tour of the Middle East. The decision to invade was confirmed for Turkish officials when, on July 16, 2002, Undersecretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz met with Prime Minister Ecevit “to convey the Bush administration’s determination to go ahead with the decision to overthrow the Saddam Hussein regime in Iraq and ask Turkey’s support for its planned military campaign.” Ecevit stated that Turkey “would desire [that] no intervention ... take place,” but seemed to accept its inevitability and sought to ensure that Turkish interests would be secured. Along with his tacit approval of the US request, Ecevit “stressed four major stipulations for Turkish cooperation: first, the war must not result in an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq. . .; second, the United States should write off $4 billion in debt. . .from Foreign Military Sales loans and compensate Turkey for the future financial losses that would occur as a result of war. . .; third, the new regime should be acceptable to the people of Iraq. . .; and fourth, the oil-rich region of Mosul and Kirkuk must remain under Baghdad’s (and not Kurdish) administration, and the area’s Turkmen must have their rights protected.” Yet, Ecevit’s support was nearly meaningless, as it was offered in the midst of tremendous political turmoil and less than a year before the general election that would replace him.

Ecevit was, by July 2002, nearly nonfunctional as Prime Minister due to illness. The perception that he was no longer fit to lead the Turkish government had a profoundly destabilizing effect on Turkish politics. The same day of the meeting between Ecevit and Wolfowitz, six deputies from Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party (DSP) announced their resignation, causing his party to lose its majority in parliament. In the months before their meeting, nearly sixty other DSP deputies had resigned and “the leader of Ecevit’s coalition partner, the Nationalist Action Party. . .had already called for early elections.” It is clear why a fractured and tumultuous environment might cause negotiations over such an important issue to stumble. 

The chaotic Turkish political system would soon yield a new government. Rather than tempering their expectations and letting the dust settle before proceeding, US officials continued talks with lame-duck members of the DSP leadership. The November 2002 election, which gave the mildly Islamist Justice and Development Party (AKP) a massive majority in the Turkish parliament, marked a turning point in Turkish politics. Aside from abandoning the strictly secular character of past Turkish governments, the election rendered agreements made with the Ecevit administration mostly useless and introduced a host of new factors that would complicate the negotiations. Rather than reassessing the situation and modifying their plans as needed, US officials “resumed negotiations from the point where they were stalled” with the ouster of the DSP.


With the rise of the AKP to power in Turkey came a number of hurdles to the negotiations with the United States. Tension between the the fiercely secular Turkish military leadership and mildly Islamist governing party hindered the transmission of plans from military officials to party leaders. This development, coupled with the Turkish military’s recently adopted policy of non-intervention in politics, made the articulation of a clear Turkish position on the invasion difficult. The Islamist character of the party also meant that AKP deputies would be less willing to support the invasion of a Muslim country than the secular DSP had been. Additionally, the AKP leadership assumed a “dual structure,” with both Abdullah Gul and Recep Tayyip Erdogan taking leading roles in the negotiations. This was complicated further by  the delay in Erdogan’s official appointment as prime minister due to his “1998 conviction for inciting hatred based on religion” after his reading of an Islamist poem. 

Specific consequences of the AKP election victory could not have been predicted by US officials. However, there were early indications that the AKP would not be as supportive of the invasion as the DSP and that the Turkish military leadership would be unenthusiastic about working with the AKP. If US officials had approached the negotiations with less haste, it seems possible that some of the problems created by the election of the AKP could have been overcome.

Before the AKP took power, “the military had a number of informal ‘contact points’ that could be used as discreet conduits for the exchange of information, usually between a high-ranking member of the [military leadership] and someone at, or close to, the top of the civilian government.” These back-channels were useful for several reasons, including that they were often used to “alleviate...mutual suspicions.” Around the time that the AKP took power, there was a “reduction in both institutional and informal contacts between the military and the government” largely due to reforms meant to “prepare Turkey for EU accession.” These reforms exacerbated the already significant tension that existed between the Turkish military and new political leadership. General Tommy Franks’s October 2002 meeting with Commander of the Turkish Armed Forces Hilmi Ozkok served as an early indication that there would be friction in the Turkish military’s relationship with the AKP. Franks “got the feeling that the General, a secular man who enjoyed a glass of wine, was not an avid fan of the Islamist administration that was almost certain to take over in mid-November.” 

Complicating this further was the fact that “the making of Turkish foreign policy was dominated by Erdogan or Gul at different periods.” Erdogan’s discussions with Paul Wolfowitz and Undersecretary for Political Affairs Marc Grossman “heightened the expectations” of US officials. Erdogan was, like Ecevit, a pragmatist on the question of supporting the US invasion. Gul, on the other hand was far “more doctrinaire.” Gul pushed stubbornly for a UN-led alternative to the US invasion, conducting a Middle East “peace tour” in early 2003 to gain support for such an initiative. 

All of this forced the United States to engage in “multi-track diplomacy,” consisting of “back channeling with Mr. Erdogan through his advisers, military to military contacts, direct contacts with the Prime Minister, contacts with the Turkish Foreign Ministry and official negotiations with the diplomatic representatives.” The result of this approach was the emergence of “discrepancies. . .between the under
standing of the official channels and. . .back channels.” Agreements reached in unofficial, “back channel,” discussions often contradicted what was said during official negotiations. This phenomenon is exemplified by an episode in late February over military memoranda of understanding (MOU). Turkish officials wanted military cooperation to be limited to what was outlined in MOU signed at the end of the negotiations, maintaining that “if, later, Washington made fresh demands, these should be subject to fresh talks.”An unofficial meeting between Foreign Minister Yasar Yakis and Colin Powell seemed to resolve the issue, when Powell agreed that the Turkish request was reasonable. When Yakis returned to Ankara, however, Turkish Ambassador Deniz Bolukbasi “complained that the American delegation in Turkey. . .were acting as if no such ‘correction’ had been made,” with some military negotiators claiming that “what Powell said did not involve them.”

Two extremely significant aspects of the negotiations, which were hampered by chaotic multi-track diplomacy, were the amount of US economic aid to be given to Turkey and the status of the Kurds and Turkmen in northern Iraq. When the United States asked Turkish officials for support, many were worried that Turkey’s economy, in the throes of a crippling recession, would be damaged further (as had happened in the Gulf War) by a US invasion of Iraq. A second significant concern was that the American invasion might result in the creation of an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq and in the marginalization of Iraqi Turkmen. Although US officials attempted to assuage Turkish worries over both the economy and the status of Kurds in northern Iraq, negotiations over these issues frequently stalled. As talks dragged on, with the United States adhering to an inflexible invasion timeline, they assumed an increasingly hostile character.
