In the run-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the United States turned to Turkey, a Cold War ally and fellow NATO member, for support. The primary US request was to allow the 4th Infantry Division to travel through Turkey to create a northern front in the march on Baghdad. On March 1, 2003, after months of planning and negotiations, the Turkish parliament refused to grant the United States its request. An apparent anomaly in an otherwise cozy bilateral relationship, this event is frequently cited as an embarrassing and damaging episode in the lead-up to the war. It is impossible to know for certain whether US officials could have secured a more favorable outcome if they had employed a different approach. What can be known, however, is which factors seemed to contribute most significantly to the diplomatic failure, and who had the most freedom to react to these factors.

The United States approached Turkey at an intensely inopportune time. After the November 2002 election victory of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), the shuffling of new policy makers to ministerial posts and tension between the civilian and military leadership hindered clear communication between US and Turkish officials. All of this occurred amidst a host of other troubling developments. Turkey’s struggling economy, international pressure over the terms of European Union accession, and fears stemming from the 1991 Gulf War rendered the notion of cooperating with the United States in the invasion extremely unpalatable for most Turks. Despite these factors, the core of Bush administration officials most ardently supportive of the invasion pushed aggressively forward. Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld, Vice President Dick Cheney, Undersecretary of State Paul Wolfowitz, and others, ignored opinions that contradicted their own, operating on the basis of a distorted view of reality. Their desire to restructure the US military and to invade Iraq as soon as possible led them to ignore valuable recommendations offered by other administration officials, including Secretary of Defense Colin Powell. Overconfident in the potency of US inducements, these officials miscalculated Turkey’s willingness to cooperate. 

Ultimately, US officials possessed more freedom in their decision making than their heavily-burdened Turkish counterparts. This disparity in the agency of US and Turkish policy makers strongly suggests that the United States was primarily at fault for damaging the US-Turkish relationship. The suggestion that a more flexible timetable and international cooperation would improve the odds of success in Iraq was ignored by fervently pro-invasion Bush administration officials. Had this advice been heeded, the United States could potentially have avoided damaging its relationship with Turkey. 

This paper will explain how the diplomatic failure occurred by examining three aspects of the episode. First, it will explore what the United States requested of Turkey and why US officials believed these requests were important. Second, it will explain why US officials believed their goals were attainable. Third, it will identify the myriad difficulties that faced the United States during its attempt to secure Turkish cooperation and how US officials reacted to these challenges. Ultimately, the lessons to be learned from the March 1 episode are similar to those presented by the US experience in Iraq more broadly. The Turkish diplomatic failure and the bungled post-invasion Iraqi nation-building project both illustrate the limits in the ability of the United States to overcome opposing wills ands shape the world as it pleases. Rather than bending the facts to fit their desired outcome, pro-war Bush administration officials should have tempered their wishes to fit the facts.

	Colin Powell’s call for a multilateral approach to Iraq, and for more flexibility in the timing of the invasion, amounted to a repudiation of the so-called Bush Doctrine. George W. Bush’s 2002 National Security Strategy warns that the United States “will not hesitate to act alone” in the defense of its national security and interests. The Bush administration made good on its claim with the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The impossibility of one nation operating against the will of the international community to shape the world is reinforced by a study of the March 1 episode in Turkey. The 2003 diplomatic failure seems to confirm that an approach reflective of Powell’s humbler assessment of US power would ultimately have been more successful.

