Tested by Turkey: The March 1, 2003 Diplomatic Failure and the Limits of US Power
Kerem Atalay

Introduction
	In the run-up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the United States turned to Turkey, a Cold War ally and fellow NATO member, for support. The primary US request was to allow the 4th Infantry Division to travel through Turkey to create a northern front in the march on Baghdad. On March 1, 2003, after months of planning and negotiations, the Turkish parliament refused to grant the United States its request. An apparent anomaly in an otherwise cozy bilateral relationship, this event is frequently cited as an embarrassing and damaging episode in the lead-up to the war. It is impossible to know for certain whether US officials could have secured a more favorable outcome if they had employed a different approach. What can be known, however, is which factors seemed to contribute most significantly to the diplomatic failure, and who had the most freedom to react to these factors.
	The United States approached Turkey at an intensely inopportune time. After the November 2002 election victory of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), the shuffling of new policy makers to ministerial posts and tension between the civilian and military leadership hindered clear communication between US and Turkish officials. All of this occurred amidst a host of other troubling developments. Turkey’s struggling economy, international pressure over the terms of European Union accession, and fears stemming from the 1991 Gulf War rendered the notion of cooperating with the United States in the invasion extremely unpalatable for most Turks. Despite these factors, the core of Bush administration officials most ardently supportive of the invasion pushed aggressively forward. Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld, Vice President Dick Cheney, Undersecretary of State Paul Wolfowitz, and others, ignored opinions that contradicted their own, operating on the basis of a distorted view of reality. Their desire to restructure the US military and to invade Iraq as soon as possible led them to ignore valuable recommendations offered by other administration officials, including Secretary of Defense Colin Powell. Overconfident in the potency of US inducements, these officials miscalculated Turkey’s willingness to cooperate. 
	Ultimately, US officials possessed more freedom in their decision making than their heavily-burdened Turkish counterparts. This disparity in the agency of US and Turkish policy makers strongly suggests that the United States was primarily at fault for damaging the US-Turkish relationship. The suggestion that a more flexible timetable and international cooperation would improve the odds of success in Iraq was ignored by fervently pro-invasion Bush administration officials. Had this advice been heeded, the United States could potentially have avoided damaging its relationship with Turkey. 
	This paper will explain how the diplomatic failure occurred by examining three aspects of the episode. First, it will explore what the United States requested of Turkey and why US officials believed these requests were important. Second, it will explain why US officials believed their goals were attainable. Third, it will identify the myriad difficulties that faced the United States during its attempt to secure Turkish cooperation and how US officials reacted to these challenges. Ultimately, the lessons to be learned from the March 1 episode are similar to those presented by the US experience in Iraq more broadly. The Turkish diplomatic failure and the bungled post-invasion Iraqi nation-building project both illustrate the limits in the ability of the United States to overcome opposing wills ands shape the world as it pleases. Rather than bending the facts to fit their desired outcome, pro-war Bush administration officials should have tempered their wishes to fit the facts.

US Ambitions: What the United States Asked of Turkey in the Run-Up to War
	The invasion strategy initially devised by General Tommy Franks “intended to create a vise that could close on the Iraqi regime from north and south.” The southern arm, to be led by the 3rd Infantry Division, would split east and west of Baghdad and then “link up to destroy any surviving Republican Guard units.” These forces were to be complemented by a northern arm, consisting of the 4th Infantry Division, which would “advance south from staging areas in Turkey.” This strategy was the basis of the first and most significant American request: transit rights for the 4th Infantry Division, consisting of between 80-90,000 troops, through Turkey and into northern Iraq. Additionally, the United States sought “permission to station 250 planes at Turkish airports, and the use of 14 airports and five sea ports.” In the words of Tommy Franks, the United States essentially requested that Turkey “lend [the United States military] their territory for a few months.” 
	An early proponent of a Turkish front in the invasion was General David McKiernan. McKiernan argued that “an attack from the north would compel Saddam’s regime to divide its attention and resources, easing the arrival of US units in the South.” Without a northern option, McKiernan reasoned, “it would take longer to get US forces into the north to safeguard the oilfields near Kirkuk and prevent ethnic fighting between the Kurds and Arabs.” McKiernan felt that Turkish cooperation was important enough to warrant spending “a national blue chip” on securing it. General Franks, apparently convinced by McKiernan’s argument, headed into negotiations with Turkish military officials aggressively. Franks declared that US officials would “turn it up until they [Turkey] realize what is at stake is the next two generations of Turks.” Claiming he wanted to “drive the system crazy,” Franks ordered his underlings to “identify who says ‘no’ and take care of him. Throw my name around. . .We do not want to be the source of ‘no.’”
	However, not all in the Bush administration were convinced of the necessity of Turkish involvement. Secretary of State Colin Powell “thought that the plan for a northern front was more difficult to carry out than CENTCOM seemed to realize.” Powell believed the value of stymying Iraqi divisions in the north “was overrated,” arguing that Iraqi divisions moving south “would be excellent targets for US airpower.” Ultimately, the proposed plan “was not Powell’s idea of a war well run.” Tactical considerations aside, Powell was also “skeptical that the Turks would agree to have American troops stationed in their country in the first place.” Powell felt that “moving an armored division. . .overland through the length of Anatolia. . .to invade another Muslim country. . .may well be one too many bricks on the scale for the Turks.” According to Powell, indelible features of Turkish society made the aggressive US diplomatic push a “risk at losing it all.” The disagreement over the necessity of Turkey as a staging ground fit into the broader clash between Powell and Rumsfeld over the proper structure of the military and of the appropriate timing of the invasion.
	In keeping with President George W. Bush’s campaign pledge to “develop lighter, more mobile, and more lethal [military] force,” Rumsfeld’s goal as secretary of defense was to restructure the US military to be smaller, more powerful, and more rapidly deployable. Thus, for the invasion of Iraq, Rumsfeld pushed military planners to devise a strategy that involved as few troops and as little time for deployment as possible. Throughout the initial planning phases of the invasion, General Franks worked arduously (often to the frustration of his subordinates) to “shave. . .deployment times” and reduce troop levels. The result was Franks’s “Running Start” invasion plan. The strategy provided what “Rumsfeld had insisted on from the beginning: the avoidance of a long, Powell-style buildup.” 
	Rumsfeld’s crusade to restructure the military was not well received by all members of the military establishment. Powell, and other notable military officials, including General Eric Shinseki, believed that deploying significantly more forces would be a safer plan for both the initial invasion and in the reconstruction phase. Additionally, Powell, as well as Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, believed the White House was rushing to war. Both felt that an invasion of Iraq should occur only after securing Afghanistan and working “vigorously with. . .allies to get as many people on board.” The pair saw January 2005 as a more appropriate date for the invasion. Powell, and other advocates of a more carefully planned invasion strategy, involving higher troop levels, did not keep their opinions to themselves. During a “long dinner with Bush and” national security advisor “Condoleezza Rice at the White House residence” in August 2002, Powell warned the president of the potential consequences of Rumsfeld’s military philosophy and advocated gaining international support before invading. Similarly, when asked how many troops he felt would be appropriate for the invasion during a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing, General Shinseki controversially stated that “several hundred thousand” would be needed. 
	An invasion conducted in accordance with Powell’s more conservative military philosophy would have had profound implications for the US approach to negotiations with Turkey. A focus on multilateralism would have helped win over the Turkish public and diminished fears that supporting the United States would lead Turkey to be alienated by the international community. Additionally, operating on the basis of a more flexible timetable would have eliminated the need for the United States to rush headlong into the chaotic, post-election Turkish political environment. 
	Powell’s positions on troop levels, the invasion timetable, and the wisdom of pushing for Turkish cooperation were never seriously considered by General Franks or Secretary Rumsfeld. Indeed, as late as February 2003, when the still-dragging negotiations led even McKiernan to embrace Powell’s perspective, and a number of Rumsfeld’s own aides “became uneasy about the war plan,” Franks and Rumsfeld stubbornly adhered to their original plan. The tendency of Bush administration hawks to ignore opinions that contradicted their own during the run-up to the war is a common source of criticism. The cadre of ardently pro-invasion officials argued that Turkish cooperation could feasibly be acquired on the basis of the history of the US-Turkish relationship and post-9/11 instances of US-Turkish cooperation. Each of these justifications were extremely problematic, and did not warrant potentially jeopardizing relations with a close ally. 
Justifying US Expectations
	Secretary Rumsfeld claims in his memoir that early discussions with Turkish officials over the planned invasion left the Bush administration with “confidence that they [the Turkish parliament] would grant us the approval we sought,” stating that “no one had anticipated that the vote might fail.” Indeed, Rumsfeld claims to have been “amazed. . .when the deal. . .failed to win parliamentary blessing.” Rumsfeld cites the history of US-Turkish relations since the Korean War, “optimistic assurances from our diplomatic corps,” and Turkish support of America’s operation in Afghanistan as reasons for believing that Turkish cooperation could be secured. However, analysis of each of these factors makes clear that Rumsfeld and others were misled.
A Legacy of Cooperation?
	An idealized notion of the history of the US-Turkish relationship seems to have convinced some in the Bush administration that securing Turkish cooperation for the 2003 invasion would be simple. Cheney speaks romantically, in his memoir, of Turkey as the ally which “stood with us in Korea and, as a NATO member,” and had “been an invaluable ally during the Cold War.” The last time the United States invaded Iraq, notes Cheney, Turkey had complied with US requests. Therefore, he implies, it was not unreasonable to expect that they would deny the United States this time around. Cheney’s assessment of the US-Turkish relationship is not entirely flawed. The United States and Turkey did, in fact, enjoy a close military relationship for a sustained period of time. Ultimately, though, Cheney’s vision ignores the details of the far more complicated reality.
	The Turkish-American strategic relationship can be traced back to the beginnings of the Cold War. “Lured by the prospect of bases on the borders of the Soviet empire and defense against the Soviet threat to Middle East oil,” American policy makers were eager to develop close ties with the young Turkish Republic. The alliance was also tremendously beneficial for the Turks. The young republic gained security against regional threats, including the Soviet Union and Iran, and benefited from the Truman Doctrine and Marshall Plan. Turkey’s entry into NATO in February 1952, and subsequent participation in the Korean War, cemented the strategic relationship between the two countries for much of the remainder of the century. In the post-Cold War period, despite the efforts of Greek and Armenian interest groups in the United States, and other minor points of friction, Turkey and the United States appeared to remain close. With Turkey taking an “active role in most of the post-Cold War peace operations led either by the United Nations or by NATO,” the relationship appeared sound.
	In reality, however, US-Turkish ties were frayed when the United States targeted Iraq following Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Despite often being characterized as a “high point in Turkish-US strategic relations,” the Gulf War foreshadowed many of the problems that led to the diplomatic failure of March 1, 2003. Turkey’s acquiescence to most American requests (including the use of Turkish bases and the deployment of over 100,000 Turkish troops to the Iraqi border) may appear to have marked a continuation of the two countries’ traditionally strong bilateral relationship. Yet, beneath the surface, support for US foreign policy was waning among political and military elites and much of the Turkish public. Many leaders in parliament and officers in the Turkish military were hesitant to “put aside Turkey’s traditional policy of non-interference in intraregional conflicts in the Middle East,” viewing Operation Desert Storm as “an ‘adventurist’ policy.” Ultimately, Turkish President Turgut Ozal overcame these hurdles and managed to secure Turkish support for the American invasion. Despite American policies meant to lessen the economic impact of the Gulf War on Turkey, the post-war situation brought numerous, significant problems for Turkey. Most significant were the elimination of a major trading partner (Iraq) due to sanctions, and an increase in Kurdish terrorism. 
	On the eve of US-Turkish negotiations over the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the aftermath of the Gulf War weighed heavily on the minds of Turkish negotiators. As US officials pushed forward with the talks, they did so driven by a self-serving interpretation of the past. Their distorted view of history reached all the way into the post-9/11 period. 

Turkey and The War on Terror
	Aside from the history of the US-Turkish relationship, US-Turkish cooperation in the war on terror and early Turkish receptivity to the invasion plan seem to have led US officials to believe that Turkish support could be secured. It is true that Turkey cooperated quite enthusiastically with the United States in Afghanistan. Yet, US-Turkish cooperation during this period should not have been interpreted as a clear indication of Turkish willingness to aid in the invasion of Iraq.
	Turkish support for the US mission in Afghanistan was expressed clearly to the United States when Rumsfeld met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, the Turkish Foreign and Defense Ministers, and the Turkish military chief on October 5, 2001. At this meeting, Turkish officials characterized the Taliban as “a menace to Islam, Turkey and the world,” declaring that it would be wrong to “let this cruel regime in Afghanistan continue.” Turkey pledged to provide military training for forces in northern Afghanistan, promising to cooperate with the United States “with all of our facilities.” Indeed, Turkey ended up assuming a “lead nation role,” in the NATO effort in Afghanistan, taking over “the command of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). . .for a period of six months.” Even after turning over command of the operation to Germany and the Netherlands, Turkey “continued to support ISAF with a 180-man military unit.” Yet, Turkish willingness to cooperate in Afghanistan meant little when it came to Iraq. The situation in both countries, and the potential consequences of involvement in both cases, were vastly different. Ultimately, the willingness of Prime Minister Ecevit to aid the United States in Afghanistan was basically meaningless, for, by the time of the 2003 invasion, he had become a lame-duck Prime Minister. 


Negotiations with the Ecevit Administration
	US officials began hinting at the possibility of invasion in March 2002, with Vice President Cheney’s visit to Ankara as part of a broader tour of the Middle East. The decision to invade was confirmed for Turkish officials when, on July 16, 2002, Undersecretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz met with Prime Minister Ecevit “to convey the Bush administration’s determination to go ahead with the decision to overthrow the Saddam Hussein regime in Iraq and ask Turkey’s support for its planned military campaign.” Ecevit stated that Turkey “would desire [that] no intervention ... take place,” but seemed to accept its inevitability and sought to ensure that Turkish interests would be secured. Along with his tacit approval of the US request, Ecevit “stressed four major stipulations for Turkish cooperation: first, the war must not result in an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq. . .; second, the United States should write off $4 billion in debt. . .from Foreign Military Sales loans and compensate Turkey for the future financial losses that would occur as a result of war. . .; third, the new regime should be acceptable to the people of Iraq. . .; and fourth, the oil-rich region of Mosul and Kirkuk must remain under Baghdad’s (and not Kurdish) administration, and the area’s Turkmen must have their rights protected.” Yet, Ecevit’s support was nearly meaningless, as it was offered in the midst of tremendous political turmoil and less than a year before the general election that would replace him.
	Ecevit was, by July 2002, nearly nonfunctional as Prime Minister due to illness. The perception that he was no longer fit to lead the Turkish government had a profoundly destabilizing effect on Turkish politics. The same day of the meeting between Ecevit and Wolfowitz, six deputies from Ecevit’s Democratic Left Party (DSP) announced their resignation, causing his party to lose its majority in parliament. In the months before their meeting, nearly sixty other DSP deputies had resigned and “the leader of Ecevit’s coalition partner, the Nationalist Action Party. . .had already called for early elections.” It is clear why a fractured and tumultuous environment might cause negotiations over such an important issue to stumble. 
	The chaotic Turkish political system would soon yield a new government. Rather than tempering their expectations and letting the dust settle before proceeding, US officials continued talks with lame-duck members of the DSP leadership. The November 2002 election, which gave the mildly Islamist Justice and Development Party (AKP) a massive majority in the Turkish parliament, marked a turning point in Turkish politics. Aside from abandoning the strictly secular character of past Turkish governments, the election rendered agreements made with the Ecevit administration mostly useless and introduced a host of new factors that would complicate the negotiations. Rather than reassessing the situation and modifying their plans as needed, US officials “resumed negotiations from the point where they were stalled” with the ouster of the DSP.

The 2002 Election Victory of the AKP
	With the rise of the AKP to power in Turkey came a number of hurdles to the negotiations with the United States. Tension between the the fiercely secular Turkish military leadership and mildly Islamist governing party hindered the transmission of plans from military officials to party leaders. This development, coupled with the Turkish military’s recently adopted policy of non-intervention in politics, made the articulation of a clear Turkish position on the invasion difficult. The Islamist character of the party also meant that AKP deputies would be less willing to support the invasion of a Muslim country than the secular DSP had been. Additionally, the AKP leadership assumed a “dual structure,” with both Abdullah Gul and Recep Tayyip Erdogan taking leading roles in the negotiations. This was complicated further by  the delay in Erdogan’s official appointment as prime minister due to his “1998 conviction for inciting hatred based on religion” after his reading of an Islamist poem. 
	Specific consequences of the AKP election victory could not have been predicted by US officials. However, there were early indications that the AKP would not be as supportive of the invasion as the DSP and that the Turkish military leadership would be unenthusiastic about working with the AKP. If US officials had approached the negotiations with less haste, it seems possible that some of the problems created by the election of the AKP could have been overcome.
	Before the AKP took power, “the military had a number of informal ‘contact points’ that could be used as discreet conduits for the exchange of information, usually between a high-ranking member of the [military leadership] and someone at, or close to, the top of the civilian government.” These back-channels were useful for several reasons, including that they were often used to “alleviate...mutual suspicions.” Around the time that the AKP took power, there was a “reduction in both institutional and informal contacts between the military and the government” largely due to reforms meant to “prepare Turkey for EU accession.” These reforms exacerbated the already significant tension that existed between the Turkish military and new political leadership. General Tommy Franks’s October 2002 meeting with Commander of the Turkish Armed Forces Hilmi Ozkok served as an early indication that there would be friction in the Turkish military’s relationship with the AKP. Franks “got the feeling that the General, a secular man who enjoyed a glass of wine, was not an avid fan of the Islamist administration that was almost certain to take over in mid-November.” 
	Complicating this further was the fact that “the making of Turkish foreign policy was dominated by Erdogan or Gul at different periods.” Erdogan’s discussions with Paul Wolfowitz and Undersecretary for Political Affairs Marc Grossman “heightened the expectations” of US officials. Erdogan was, like Ecevit, a pragmatist on the question of supporting the US invasion. Gul, on the other hand was far “more doctrinaire.” Gul pushed stubbornly for a UN-led alternative to the US invasion, conducting a Middle East “peace tour” in early 2003 to gain support for such an initiative. 
	All of this forced the United States to engage in “multi-track diplomacy,” consisting of “back channeling with Mr. Erdogan through his advisers, military to military contacts, direct contacts with the Prime Minister, contacts with the Turkish Foreign Ministry and official negotiations with the diplomatic representatives.” The result of this approach was the emergence of “discrepancies. . .between the under
standing of the official channels and. . .back channels.” Agreements reached in unofficial, “back channel,” discussions often contradicted what was said during official negotiations. This phenomenon is exemplified by an episode in late February over military memoranda of understanding (MOU). Turkish officials wanted military cooperation to be limited to what was outlined in MOU signed at the end of the negotiations, maintaining that “if, later, Washington made fresh demands, these should be subject to fresh talks.”An unofficial meeting between Foreign Minister Yasar Yakis and Colin Powell seemed to resolve the issue, when Powell agreed that the Turkish request was reasonable. When Yakis returned to Ankara, however, Turkish Ambassador Deniz Bolukbasi “complained that the American delegation in Turkey. . .were acting as if no such ‘correction’ had been made,” with some military negotiators claiming that “what Powell said did not involve them.”
	Two extremely significant aspects of the negotiations, which were hampered by chaotic multi-track diplomacy, were the amount of US economic aid to be given to Turkey and the status of the Kurds and Turkmen in northern Iraq. When the United States asked Turkish officials for support, many were worried that Turkey’s economy, in the throes of a crippling recession, would be damaged further (as had happened in the Gulf War) by a US invasion of Iraq. A second significant concern was that the American invasion might result in the creation of an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq and in the marginalization of Iraqi Turkmen. Although US officials attempted to assuage Turkish worries over both the economy and the status of Kurds in northern Iraq, negotiations over these issues frequently stalled. As talks dragged on, with the United States adhering to an inflexible invasion timeline, they assumed an increasingly hostile character.

Multi-Track Diplomacy and the Question of US Economic Aid
	When negotiations began in 2002, Turkey was in the midst of an International Monetary Fund-led effort to “extricate its economy from its worst recession since 1945.” Exacerbated by the “international uncertainty following the [September 11] attacks on the United States,” the Turkish economy suffered from “a huge domestic debt load” that could not be remedied by traditional means. The global economic downturn of the period “shelved plans by Turkey to export its way out of trouble” and “upheaval in the Middle East hurt its ability to borrow on international markets.” The last thing that Turkish policy makers wanted was for an American invasion of Iraq to jeopardize its economic situation further. They had good reason to believe that it might. 
	The 1991 Gulf War had enormously negative implications for the Turkish economy. The United States post-war imposition of sanctions on Iraq caused Turkey to lose a major trading partner. The Turkish government estimated the cost of the sanctions program to have been between “$30 billion to $100 billion,” and was resentful that “the international community never compensated Turkey for its losses.” By the start of negotiations in 2002, bilateral trade between Turkey and Iraq, carried out through the United Nations “oil-for-food” program and the “semi-illicit trade in diesel and crude oil,” totaled $1 billion annually. In addition to the feared loss of revenue from trade with Iraq, Turkey was concerned that rising oil prices, diminished foreign investment, a decline in tourism, and other factors, would devastate the Turkish economy. In order to diminish the potential ill-effects of a war on the Turkish economy, Turkish negotiators made cooperation conditional upon the receipt of substantial US financial aid.
	As early as the first meeting between Generals Tommy Franks and Hilmi Ozkok in October 2002, when Franks alluded to “possible economic aid that [Turkey] badly needed,” US officials displayed a willingness to compensate the Turks for their cooperation. Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Douglas Feith claims in his memoir that the administration was also mindful that “Turkey had paid a large price as a result of the 1990-91 Gulf War” and were aware of Turkish concerns stemming from this experience. Yet, negotiations over the question of economic aid were eventually characterized by mutual resentment and intense hostility. Some US officials viewed “Turkish efforts to hold out for more aid. . .as ‘extortion in the name of alliance.’” Officials were equally frustrated on the Turkish side.  AKP parliamentarian Murat Mercan, stated that the talks became “a business negotiation, not something between friends. It disgusted me.”
	As with the discussions over MOU, negotiations over the aid package were conducted via multiple channels, and were also impeded as a result. For example, on December 28, Foreign Minister Yakis called Colin Powell over concerns regarding negotiations over “economic worries.” Powell assured Yakis that Turkish concerns would be addressed. Yet, the following day, when Marc Grossman and Treasury Undersecretary John Taylor met with Minister of State Ali Babacan, they rejected Babacan’s estimate that an invasion would cost Turkey $28 billion. The episode, one of numerous such instances, served to diminish confidence on both sides and elevate tension.

The “Inflation of Channels” and the Question of Northern Iraq
	Turkish apprehension over an independent Kurdish state forming as a result of the 2003 invasion had roots in the Gulf War. During the first US war against Iraq, the US-led “Operation Provide Comfort and Operation Poised Hammer, as well as the establishment of two separate no-fly-zones in the south and north of Iraq,” led to a concentration of Kurdish refugees near the Turkish border. This development was interpreted by many Turks as “a first step in a long-term US plan to create an independent Kurdish state.” Such concerns were bolstered by US military training programs for Kurdish militants in Guam which included “the fundamentals of administering a state bureaucracy.” Ultimately, the result of US policies in northern Iraq was the emergence of a de facto Kurdish state, possessing a “parliament, ministries, a bureaucracy, a central bank, and its own currency.” The gradual crystallization of a Kurdish state emboldened Kurdish terrorist groups and political parties, giving them reason to “accelerate their objective of establishing an autonomous. . .Kurdish state. . .in northern Iraq.” Additionally, the migration of Kurds to the region escalated tension between Iraqi Turkmen and Iraqi Kurds. 
	Kurdish separatism had been a controversial problem for Turkish (Ottoman) governments since before the foundation of the Turkish Republic. The problem had become particularly troubling after the Gulf War. Many in Turkey believe that the post-Gulf War situation in northern Iraq created a safe haven for the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, a Kurdish terrorist group which the Turkish government claims caused the loss of 30,000 Turkish lives since 1991. Additionally, Turkish officials feared that “Kurdish autonomy in Iraq could revive similar dreams” among the other “12 million Kurds living in Turkey.” Thus, a major Turkish goal in negotiations with the United States was to secure guarantees that an independent Kurdish state would not emerge following the elimination of Saddam Hussein. Further, the Turkish government sought to ensure that the Turkmen population of Iraq would not be threatened by Iraqi Kurds.
	Discussion of US policy towards Iraqi Kurds following the invasion were a part of the aforementioned negotiations over military MOU. As stated earlier, these talks were plagued by confusion and contradiction. The volatility of the question of northern Iraq only intensified as the negotiations dragged on. US officials, who were reluctant to allow Turkey to “take part and register” arms transfers to Kurds in Iraq, caused Turkish policy makers to worry that “Washington was favoring the Kurds” and “had a hidden agenda with respect” them. The gravity of the Kurdish issue to the Turkish side, coupled with the ambiguity of multi-track diplomacy, caused this to be a significant source of diplomatic tension.
	Ultimately, it seems a less rushed approach to the negotiations would have avoided much of this confusion. The United States should have waited for the AKP government to sort out questions of party leadership.  Additionally, US officials should waited until the nature of civilian-military relations in Turkey was known before attempting to push for Turkish cooperation. Had these ambiguities been resolved, fewer, clearer channels for negotiations could have been established. If US officials had followed a more flexible invasion timetable, like the one advocated by Powell and Armitage, a less hurried approach would have been possible.

US Unilateralism and Turkish Concerns
	As stated earlier, Colin Powell was a major proponent of a multilateral approach to the invasion. If his recommendation had been put to action, and international support for the invasion had been pursued, it seems likely that two major Turkish concerns could have been addressed. 
	First, Turkish officials feared that participation in the invasion would threaten chances at European Union accession. A central long-term goal AKP was for Turkey to become a member of the European Union. This ambition of the Turkish political leadership contributed to its hesitance to support the United States in Iraq. Because several leading states within the EU were critical of the planned US invasion, Turkey felt that offering the United States unequivocal support would serve as a set-back in the accession process. The United States approached Turkey in the midst of a significant phase of the accession process, with new criteria for accession presented during the Copenhagen conference in mid-December 2002. If US officials had been more willing to compromise with their European allies over the invasion, Turkish cooperation would likely have been more forthcoming.
	A second impediment was Turkish public opinion, which was overwhelmingly opposed to the planned invasion. Public opposition to the war made support for the United States a politically imprudent position for a deputy to hold. The unpopularity of the invasion, evidenced anecdotally by reports of “members of the Justice and Development Party” being “excoriated by their local constituents when they returned home,” is supported by Pew polling conducted in 2002. A study of global perspectives of the United States found that 55% of Turks had an unfavorable view of the United States in general and 78% were opposed to the “spread of American ideas and customs.” On questions related to US foreign policy, 74% of Turks surveyed answered “no” to the question of whether “US foreign policy considers others.” Further, 58% of Turks were opposed to the US-led war on terrorism. Turkish public opinion of the planned invasion of Iraq was particularly negative. An early January 2003 poll conducted by the Ankara Social Research Center (ANAR) revealed that 87% of Turks opposed a military operation against Iraq. Furthermore, 62.8% believed Turkey should not get involved in a war, directly or indirectly, by making bases available to the United States. An image of a cooperative United States, sensitive to the apprehensions of other states, would probably not have inspired such revulsion of US foreign policy in Turkey. 

Lessons Learned
	Colin Powell’s call for a multilateral approach to Iraq, and for more flexibility in the timing of the invasion, amounted to a repudiation of the so-called Bush Doctrine. George W. Bush’s 2002 National Security Strategy warns that the United States “will not hesitate to act alone” in the defense of its national security and interests. The Bush administration made good on its claim with the 2003 invasion of Iraq. The impossibility of one nation operating against the will of the international community to shape the world is reinforced by a study of the March 1 episode in Turkey. The 2003 diplomatic failure seems to confirm that an approach reflective of Powell’s humbler assessment of US power would ultimately have been more successful.



Works Cited

Primary Sources
