When negotiations began in 2002, Turkey was in the midst of an International Monetary Fund-led effort to “extricate its economy from its worst recession since 1945.” Exacerbated by the “international uncertainty following the [September 11] attacks on the United States,” the Turkish economy suffered from “a huge domestic debt load” that could not be remedied by traditional means. The global economic downturn of the period “shelved plans by Turkey to export its way out of trouble” and “upheaval in the Middle East hurt its ability to borrow on international markets.” The last thing that Turkish policy makers wanted was for an American invasion of Iraq to jeopardize its economic situation further. They had good reason to believe that it might. 

The 1991 Gulf War had enormously negative implications for the Turkish economy. The United States post-war imposition of sanctions on Iraq caused Turkey to lose a major trading partner. The Turkish government estimated the cost of the sanctions program to have been between “$30 billion to $100 billion,” and was resentful that “the international community never compensated Turkey for its losses.” By the start of negotiations in 2002, bilateral trade between Turkey and Iraq, carried out through the United Nations “oil-for-food” program and the “semi-illicit trade in diesel and crude oil,” totaled $1 billion annually. In addition to the feared loss of revenue from trade with Iraq, Turkey was concerned that rising oil prices, diminished foreign investment, a decline in tourism, and other factors, would devastate the Turkish economy. In order to diminish the potential ill-effects of a war on the Turkish economy, Turkish negotiators made cooperation conditional upon the receipt of substantial US financial aid.

As early as the first meeting between Generals Tommy Franks and Hilmi Ozkok in October 2002, when Franks alluded to “possible economic aid that [Turkey] badly needed,” US officials displayed a willingness to compensate the Turks for their cooperation. Undersecretary of Defense for Policy Douglas Feith claims in his memoir that the administration was also mindful that “Turkey had paid a large price as a result of the 1990-91 Gulf War” and were aware of Turkish concerns stemming from this experience. Yet, negotiations over the question of economic aid were eventually characterized by mutual resentment and intense hostility. Some US officials viewed “Turkish efforts to hold out for more aid. . .as ‘extortion in the name of alliance.’” Officials were equally frustrated on the Turkish side.  AKP parliamentarian Murat Mercan, stated that the talks became “a business negotiation, not something between friends. It disgusted me.”

As with the discussions over MOU, negotiations over the aid package were conducted via multiple channels, and were also impeded as a result. For example, on December 28, Foreign Minister Yakis called Colin Powell over concerns regarding negotiations over “economic worries.” Powell assured Yakis that Turkish concerns would be addressed. Yet, the following day, when Marc Grossman and Treasury Undersecretary John Taylor met with Minister of State Ali Babacan, they rejected Babacan’s estimate that an invasion would cost Turkey $28 billion. The episode, one of numerous such instances, served to diminish confidence on both sides and elevate tension.

Turkish apprehension over an independent Kurdish state forming as a result of the 2003 invasion had roots in the Gulf War. During the first US war against Iraq, the US-led “Operation Provide Comfort and Operation Poised Hammer, as well as the establishment of two separate no-fly-zones in the south and north of Iraq,” led to a concentration of Kurdish refugees near the Turkish border. This development was interpreted by many Turks as “a first step in a long-term US plan to create an independent Kurdish state.” Such concerns were bolstered by US military training programs for Kurdish militants in Guam which included “the fundamentals of administering a state bureaucracy.” Ultimately, the result of US policies in northern Iraq was the emergence of a de facto Kurdish state, possessing a “parliament, ministries, a bureaucracy, a central bank, and its own currency.” The gradual crystallization of a Kurdish state emboldened Kurdish terrorist groups and political parties, giving them reason to “accelerate their objective of establishing an autonomous. . .Kurdish state. . .in northern Iraq.” Additionally, the migration of Kurds to the region escalated tension between Iraqi Turkmen and Iraqi Kurds. 

Kurdish separatism had been a controversial problem for Turkish (Ottoman) governments since before the foundation of the Turkish Republic. The problem had become particularly troubling after the Gulf War. Many in Turkey believe that the post-Gulf War situation in northern Iraq created a safe haven for the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, a Kurdish terrorist group which the Turkish government claims caused the loss of 30,000 Turkish lives since 1991. Additionally, Turkish officials feared that “Kurdish autonomy in Iraq could revive similar dreams” among the other “12 million Kurds living in Turkey.” Thus, a major Turkish goal in negotiations with the United States was to secure guarantees that an independent Kurdish state would not emerge following the elimination of Saddam Hussein. Further, the Turkish government sought to ensure that the Turkmen population of Iraq would not be threatened by Iraqi Kurds.
	
Discussion of US policy towards Iraqi Kurds following the invasion were a part of the aforementioned negotiations over military MOU. As stated earlier, these talks were plagued by confusion and contradiction. The volatility of the question of northern Iraq only intensified as the negotiations dragged on. US officials, who were reluctant to allow Turkey to “take part and register” arms transfers to Kurds in Iraq, caused Turkish policy makers to worry that “Washington was favoring the Kurds” and “had a hidden agenda with respect” them. The gravity of the Kurdish issue to the Turkish side, coupled with the ambiguity of multi-track diplomacy, caused this to be a significant source of diplomatic tension.
	
Ultimately, it seems a less rushed approach to the negotiations would have avoided much of this confusion. The United States should have waited for the AKP government to sort out questions of party leadership.  Additionally, US officials should waited until the nature of civilian-military relations in Turkey was known before attempting to push for Turkish cooperation. Had these ambiguities been resolved, fewer, clearer channels for negotiations could have been established. If US officials had followed a more flexible invasion timetable, like the one advocated by Powell and Armitage, a less hurried approach would have been possible.

As stated earlier, Colin Powell was a major proponent of a multilateral approach to the invasion. If his recommendation had been put to action, and international support for the invasion had been pursued, it seems likely that two major Turkish concerns could have been addressed. 
	
First, Turkish officials feared that participation in the invasion would threaten chances at European Union accession. A central long-term goal AKP was for Turkey to become a member of the European Union. This ambition of the Turkish political leadership contributed to its hesitance to support the United States in Iraq. Because several leading states within the EU were critical of the planned US invasion, Turkey felt that offering the United States unequivocal support would serve as a set-back in the accession process. The United States approached Turkey in the midst of a significant phase of the accession process, with new criteria for accession presented during the Copenhagen conference in mid-December 2002. If US officials had been more willing to compromise with their European allies over the invasion, Turkish cooperation would likely have been more forthcoming.
	
A second impediment was Turkish public opinion, which was overwhelmingly opposed to the planned invasion. Public opposition to the war made support for the United States a politically imprudent position for a deputy to hold. The unpopularity of the invasion, evidenced anecdotally by reports of “members of the Justice and Development Party” being “excoriated by their local constituents when they returned home,” is supported by Pew polling conducted in 2002. A study of global perspectives of the United States found that 55% of Turks had an unfavorable view of the United States in general and 78% were opposed to the “spread of American ideas and customs.” On questions related to US foreign policy, 74% of Turks surveyed answered “no” to the question of whether “US foreign policy considers others.” Further, 58% of Turks were opposed to the US-led war on terrorism. Turkish public opinion of the planned invasion of Iraq was particularly negative. An early January 2003 poll conducted by the Ankara Social Research Center (ANAR) revealed that 87% of Turks opposed a military operation against Iraq. Furthermore, 62.8% believed Turkey should not get involved in a war, directly or indirectly, by making bases available to the United States. An image of a cooperative United States, sensitive to the apprehensions of other states, would probably not have inspired such revulsion of US foreign policy in Turkey. 
