The invasion strategy initially devised by General Tommy Franks “intended to create a vise that could close on the Iraqi regime from north and south.” The southern arm, to be led by the 3rd Infantry Division, would split east and west of Baghdad and then “link up to destroy any surviving Republican Guard units.” These forces were to be complemented by a northern arm, consisting of the 4th Infantry Division, which would “advance south from staging areas in Turkey.” This strategy was the basis of the first and most significant American request: transit rights for the 4th Infantry Division, consisting of between 80-90,000 troops, through Turkey and into northern Iraq. Additionally, the United States sought “permission to station 250 planes at Turkish airports, and the use of 14 airports and five sea ports.” In the words of Tommy Franks, the United States essentially requested that Turkey “lend [the United States military] their territory for a few months.” 

An early proponent of a Turkish front in the invasion was General David McKiernan. McKiernan argued that “an attack from the north would compel Saddam’s regime to divide its attention and resources, easing the arrival of US units in the South.” Without a northern option, McKiernan reasoned, “it would take longer to get US forces into the north to safeguard the oilfields near Kirkuk and prevent ethnic fighting between the Kurds and Arabs.” McKiernan felt that Turkish cooperation was important enough to warrant spending “a national blue chip” on securing it. General Franks, apparently convinced by McKiernan’s argument, headed into negotiations with Turkish military officials aggressively. Franks declared that US officials would “turn it up until they [Turkey] realize what is at stake is the next two generations of Turks.” Claiming he wanted to “drive the system crazy,” Franks ordered his underlings to “identify who says ‘no’ and take care of him. Throw my name around. . .We do not want to be the source of ‘no.’”

However, not all in the Bush administration were convinced of the necessity of Turkish involvement. Secretary of State Colin Powell “thought that the plan for a northern front was more difficult to carry out than CENTCOM seemed to realize.” Powell believed the value of stymying Iraqi divisions in the north “was overrated,” arguing that Iraqi divisions moving south “would be excellent targets for US airpower.” Ultimately, the proposed plan “was not Powell’s idea of a war well run.” Tactical considerations aside, Powell was also “skeptical that the Turks would agree to have American troops stationed in their country in the first place.” Powell felt that “moving an armored division. . .overland through the length of Anatolia. . .to invade another Muslim country. . .may well be one too many bricks on the scale for the Turks.” According to Powell, indelible features of Turkish society made the aggressive US diplomatic push a “risk at losing it all.” The disagreement over the necessity of Turkey as a staging ground fit into the broader clash between Powell and Rumsfeld over the proper structure of the military and of the appropriate timing of the invasion.

In keeping with President George W. Bush’s campaign pledge to “develop lighter, more mobile, and more lethal [military] force,” Rumsfeld’s goal as secretary of defense was to restructure the US military to be smaller, more powerful, and more rapidly deployable. Thus, for the invasion of Iraq, Rumsfeld pushed military planners to devise a strategy that involved as few troops and as little time for deployment as possible. Throughout the initial planning phases of the invasion, General Franks worked arduously (often to the frustration of his subordinates) to “shave. . .deployment times” and reduce troop levels. The result was Franks’s “Running Start” invasion plan. The strategy provided what “Rumsfeld had insisted on from the beginning: the avoidance of a long, Powell-style buildup.” 

Rumsfeld’s crusade to restructure the military was not well received by all members of the military establishment. Powell, and other notable military officials, including General Eric Shinseki, believed that deploying significantly more forces would be a safer plan for both the initial invasion and in the reconstruction phase. Additionally, Powell, as well as Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, believed the White House was rushing to war. Both felt that an invasion of Iraq should occur only after securing Afghanistan and working “vigorously with. . .allies to get as many people on board.” The pair saw January 2005 as a more appropriate date for the invasion. Powell, and other advocates of a more carefully planned invasion strategy, involving higher troop levels, did not keep their opinions to themselves. During a “long dinner with Bush and” national security advisor “Condoleezza Rice at the White House residence” in August 2002, Powell warned the president of the potential consequences of Rumsfeld’s military philosophy and advocated gaining international support before invading. Similarly, when asked how many troops he felt would be appropriate for the invasion during a Senate Armed Services Committee hearing, General Shinseki controversially stated that “several hundred thousand” would be needed. 

An invasion conducted in accordance with Powell’s more conservative military philosophy would have had profound implications for the US approach to negotiations with Turkey. A focus on multilateralism would have helped win over the Turkish public and diminished fears that supporting the United States would lead Turkey to be alienated by the international community. Additionally, operating on the basis of a more flexible timetable would have eliminated the need for the United States to rush headlong into the chaotic, post-election Turkish political environment. 

Powell’s positions on troop levels, the invasion timetable, and the wisdom of pushing for Turkish cooperation were never seriously considered by General Franks or Secretary Rumsfeld. Indeed, as late as February 2003, when the still-dragging negotiations led even McKiernan to embrace Powell’s perspective, and a number of Rumsfeld’s own aides “became uneasy about the war plan,” Franks and Rumsfeld stubbornly adhered to their original plan. The tendency of Bush administration hawks to ignore opinions that contradicted their own during the run-up to the war is a common source of criticism. The cadre of ardently pro-invasion officials argued that Turkish cooperation could feasibly be acquired on the basis of the history of the US-Turkish relationship and post-9/11 instances of US-Turkish cooperation. Each of these justifications were extremely problematic, and did not warrant potentially jeopardizing relations with a close ally. 

Secretary Rumsfeld claims in his memoir that early discussions with Turkish officials over the planned invasion left the Bush administration with “confidence that they [the Turkish parliament] would grant us the approval we sought,” stating that “no one had anticipated that the vote might fail.” Indeed, Rumsfeld claims to have been “amazed. . .when the deal. . .failed to win parliamentary blessing.” Rumsfeld cites the history of US-Turkish relations since the Korean War, “optimistic assurances from our diplomatic corps,” and Turkish support of America’s operation in Afghanistan as reasons for believing that Turkish cooperation could be secured. However, analysis of each of these factors makes clear that Rumsfeld and others were misled.

An idealized notion of the history of the US-Turkish relationship seems to have convinced some in the Bush administration that securing Turkish cooperation for the 2003 invasion would be simple. Cheney speaks romantically, in his memoir, of Turkey as the ally which “stood with us in Korea and, as a NATO member,” and had “been an invaluable ally during the Cold War.” The last time the United States invaded Iraq, notes Cheney, Turkey had complied with US requests. Therefore, he implies, it was not unreasonable to expect that they would deny the United States this time around. Cheney’s assessment of the US-Turkish relationship is not entirely flawed. The United States and Turkey did, in fact, enjoy a close military relationship for a sustained period of time. Ultimately, though, Cheney’s vision ignores the details of the far more complicated reality.

The Turkish-American strategic relationship can be traced back to the beginnings of the Cold War. “Lured by the prospect of bases on the borders of the Soviet empire and defense against the Soviet threat to Middle East oil,” American policy makers were eager to develop close ties with the young Turkish Republic. The alliance was also tremendously beneficial for the Turks. The young republic gained security against regional threats, including the Soviet Union and Iran, and benefited from the Truman Doctrine and Marshall Plan. Turkey’s entry into NATO in February 1952, and subsequent participation in the Korean War, cemented the strategic relationship between the two countries for much of the remainder of the century. In the post-Cold War period, despite the efforts of Greek and Armenian interest groups in the United States, and other minor points of friction, Turkey and the United States appeared to remain close. With Turkey taking an “active role in most of the post-Cold War peace operations led either by the United Nations or by NATO,” the relationship appeared sound.

In reality, however, US-Turkish ties were frayed when the United States targeted Iraq following Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Despite often being characterized as a “high point in Turkish-US strategic relations,” the Gulf War foreshadowed many of the problems that led to the diplomatic failure of March 1, 2003. Turkey’s acquiescence to most American requests (including the use of Turkish bases and the deployment of over 100,000 Turkish troops to the Iraqi border) may appear to have marked a continuation of the two countries’ traditionally strong bilateral relationship. Yet, beneath the surface, support for US foreign policy was waning among political and military elites and much of the Turkish public. Many leaders in parliament and officers in the Turkish military were hesitant to “put aside Turkey’s traditional policy of non-interference in intraregional conflicts in the Middle East,” viewing Operation Desert Storm as “an ‘adventurist’ policy.” Ultimately, Turkish President Turgut Ozal overcame these hurdles and managed to secure Turkish support for the American invasion. Despite American policies meant to lessen the economic impact of the Gulf War on Turkey, the post-war situation brought numerous, significant problems for Turkey. Most significant were the elimination of a major trading partner (Iraq) due to sanctions, and an increase in Kurdish terrorism. 

On the eve of US-Turkish negotiations over the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the aftermath of the Gulf War weighed heavily on the minds of Turkish negotiators. As US officials pushed forward with the talks, they did so driven by a self-serving interpretation of the past. Their distorted view of history reached all the way into the post-9/11 period. 


Aside from the history of the US-Turkish relationship, US-Turkish cooperation in the war on terror and early Turkish receptivity to the invasion plan seem to have led US officials to believe that Turkish support could be secured. It is true that Turkey cooperated quite enthusiastically with the United States in Afghanistan. Yet, US-Turkish cooperation during this period should not have been interpreted as a clear indication of Turkish willingness to aid in the invasion of Iraq.

Turkish support for the US mission in Afghanistan was expressed clearly to the United States when Rumsfeld met with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit, the Turkish Foreign and Defense Ministers, and the Turkish military chief on October 5, 2001. At this meeting, Turkish officials characterized the Taliban as “a menace to Islam, Turkey and the world,” declaring that it would be wrong to “let this cruel regime in Afghanistan continue.” Turkey pledged to provide military training for forces in northern Afghanistan, promising to cooperate with the United States “with all of our facilities.” Indeed, Turkey ended up assuming a “lead nation role,” in the NATO effort in Afghanistan, taking over “the command of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). . .for a period of six months.” Even after turning over command of the operation to Germany and the Netherlands, Turkey “continued to support ISAF with a 180-man military unit.” Yet, Turkish willingness to cooperate in Afghanistan meant little when it came to Iraq. The situation in both countries, and the potential consequences of involvement in both cases, were vastly different. Ultimately, the willingness of Prime Minister Ecevit to aid the United States in Afghanistan was basically meaningless, for, by the time of the 2003 invasion, he had become a lame-duck Prime Minister. 