
A final change that, if implemented, seems likely to yield tremendous benefits for the global poor, is for the Bank to advocate programs in both developed and developing countries that aim to redistribute wealth and that increase the scope and reach of social welfare networks. The notion that wealth disparity promotes economic growth, particularly in impoverished countries, has been effectively debunked. Evidence that “credit market imperfections” cause income distribution to have a long-lasting effect on “investment in human capital, entrepreneurial activity, aggregate income, and economic development,” has led many to supplant “physical capital accumulation” with “human capital accumulation as the prime engine of economic growth.” These findings coupled with the suggestion that “wide income disparities tend to coexist with underinvestment in human capital,” make clear that in order to eliminate poverty, robust investment in human capital must be undertaken. The Bank has initiated projects, perhaps most notably Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) schemes, with this notion as their guiding principle. Yet, as mentioned earlier, evidence such as the Bank’s CPIA criteria indicate a seeming hesitance of the Bank to fully embrace these ideas. 

For the Bank’s approach to ending poverty to be optimally effective, it should implement the following reforms. First, the Bank should advocate the administration of redistributive programs in upper and middle income countries. A growing body of evidence suggests that government redistribution can have a powerful impact on wealth inequality in developed countries. The Bank should consider options as radical as a basic guaranteed income (BGI) in those countries with the potential to generate sufficient revenue. The Bank’s work implementing CCT programs in Turkey reveals the potential to enhance need assessment and the delivery of resources to impoverished communities globally. In both cases, where the potential for funding through taxation is present, the Bank should advise that more aggressively redistributive taxation systems be implemented. Otherwise, the Bank should provide grants and loans to fund the operation of cash transfer and social safety programs.

In both developed and developing countries, there is ample evidence to suggest that redistributive policies can be extremely effective in fighting poverty and reducing wealth inequality. In the United States, the Alaskan Permanent Fund (APF) and Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) provides compelling evidence to this effect. In Brazil, the Bolsa Familia (BF) program proves that such programs can also yield significant benefits in middle income countries. The areas of weakness in the delivery of these programs, particularly in middle income countries, indicate where Bank action will be most valuable.

The APF was initiated in 1976 following the discovery of large oil reserves in Alaska. The program allocated 25 percent of the revenue generated through the exploitation of natural resources toward a fund which has grown in size from $1 billion in the early eighties to $40 billion today. The program pays a maximum of $3,269 to Alaskan residents individually, as opposed to households. The results of the program have been profound. Alaska is currently the most egalitarian state in the United States, with a Gini coefficient of 0.402, compared to the U.S. Gini coefficient of 0.469. The program is so popular in Alaska that “proposing an end” to it is tantamount to committing “political suicide.” Indeed, even the staunchest proponents of small government have continued its operation, with the program’s highest payments being made under Republican Sarah Palin. The relatively small size of Alaska’s population, which is only 700,000, and the fact that the program is funded through the sale of natural resources as opposed to taxation, might indicate that it would not translate well to the national level. Yet, if the implementation of such a program at the federal level followed the implementation of a more progressive tax schedule and increasing marginal tax rates on the wealthiest residents of the United States, the possibility of supporting the initiative with revenue generated through taxation seems more feasible. 

The possibility of initiating such a program at the federal level is supported by existing federally operated redistributive policies which have enjoyed tremendous success. An example is the EITC, initiated in 1975 and twice expanded by Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama in 1992 and 2009. The EITC works by providing households a tax credit based on the disparity between their income and a credit limit of $46,471. Studies conducted by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities have shown that the EITC has contributed to “increased labor and employment levels,. . .decreased poverty, and has made the tax system fairer.” The success of the program nationally has led twenty three states and the District of Columbia to offer additional tax credits on earned income. 

In middle income countries, similar programs have also enjoyed success. An example is the BF program initiated in Brazil by President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva in 2003. BF offers income supplements to all Brazilian families with a per capita income below R$140 per month. Additional benefits are offered on the basis of the number of children in a household and their age. Unlike the EITC in the United States, BF contains measures of conditionality. If a mother receiving aid is pregnant, she is required to submit to prenatal testing and doctors visits after delivery. Parents are also required to vaccinate their children and to ensure that their children are attending school. Like the APF and EITC, the BF has been extremely successful. From 2003 to 2008, the proportion of Brazilian families earning a monthly per capita income below R$93.75 decreased from 17.5 percent to 8.8 percent. Additionally, Brazil’s Gini coefficient has decreased from 0.599 in 1995 to 0.53 in 2009. 

Despite the success of programs like Bolsa Familia, Brazil and other middle income countries face significant impediments to the assessment of need and the delivery of aid. A major hurdle to redistributive policies is inefficient tax collection. Assessing the efficiency of tax collection in Latin America, where tax collection in nearly all countries is “well short of the international norm,” reveals many of the reasons generating revenue in a middle income country can be difficult. Efficient taxation is hindered most significantly in Latin America by the region’s relatively narrow tax bases and by the relatively low statutory tax rates implemented by Latin American governments. Recent estimates place tax evasion rates in Latin America at between 45 to 60 percent for both personal and corporate income taxes. Tax evasion in the region is “encouraged by weak tax administrations” and is exacerbated by size of the region’s informal economy. Tax concessions, including “exemptions, deductions, and other loopholes” also play a “major role in narrowing income tax bases across Latin America.” It is therefore clear that the Bank has a potentially significant role to play in this area. The World Bank has already stepped up its role in political reform for the sake of combatting corruption. It should extend its public policy advising further into the realm of taxation. Both in developed and developing countries, the Bank should push for tax systems that are progressive and free of excessive opportunities for evasion. The Bank should also work to increase borrowing country’s administrative capacities in this area. Enhancing revenue extraction capabilities will wean host country dependence on Bank loans for the purpose of funding social welfare programs and also aid in reducing wealth disparity. Making the disbursement of loans for other purposes conditional on the implementation of meaningful tax reform could be used as a measure to induce progress in this area. 

A second major impediment to the redistribution of wealth in Latin America is ineffective targeting. The majority of spending on social programs is highly regressive, largely due to the fact that many poor households work in the informal sector and thus “have little access to. . .benefits aimed at formal sector workers.” The case of pensions in Latin America is illustrative, with the top two quintiles of the regional population attracting over 80 percent of spending and the bottom quintile receiving less than 3 percent. Although programs that attempt to overcome the regressive nature of most public spending are more successful in delivering aid to the poorest, with CCT programs allocating nearly 75 percent of resources to the bottom two quintiles, their success in targeting is limited relative to the performance of CCT programs in other areas. 

In order to enhance the effectiveness of targeting in social welfare programs, the Bank should employ proxy means tests, similar to those used by the Bank in Turkey. Despite the size of the informal sector in many regions of Turkey, the implementation of CCT programs on the basis of need assessment determined through correlation of household spending on goods indicative of poverty allowed for extremely effective targeting. CCT programs in Turkey were successful in a variety of other ways as well, increasing the full immunization rate for pre-school children by 14 percent and increasing per capita caloric consumption by 23 percent. Thus, the Bank has already proven that proxy means testing is extremely effective as a method for overcoming traditional challenges to targeting. The Bank should therefore expand the use of proxy means tests, and CCT more broadly.  