Although the current allocation of power in the World Bank is almost certainly not the result of a US imperialist agenda or neocolonialist plot, it is clear that the West enjoys a disproportionate influence on Bank policy. Efforts to constrain the power of the US to impact Bank policy and to empower traditionally marginalized countries seem likely to enhance the institution’s perceived legitimacy and the effectiveness of its initiatives. The World Bank has not been deaf to allegations that its governance structure renders it a tool of US foreign policy. Efforts to reconfigure voting power and other aspects of Bank governance to be more equitable have been undertaken. Yet, several features of Bank governance which lend support to the notion that the Bank disproportionately serves the interests of Western countries persist.

First, the tradition of allowing US appointment of the World Bank president is anachronistic and grossly undemocratic. The persistence of this unofficial agreement by the Bank’s founders hampers the Bank’s effective operation in a number of ways. Most obviously, the current non-competitive selection process precludes the appointment of the most fit individual for the job. The notion that merit should serve as the basis of one’s selection to a post, and that the capabilities of an official should be assessed by the constituents to which one will be beholden, is foundational in US democracy and is widely accepted throughout the world. Non-adherence to this basic democratic principle is rightly perceived as hypocritical and injures the legitimacy of the institution globally. Why, after all, should a country comply with the demands or advice of an institution that is seen as “reflecting the interests of the advanced industrial countries, many of them former colonial masters?”  Bank policies should be responsive to the interests of the global majority and directed toward giving a voice to the world’s most vulnerable societies. Further, the selection of the World Bank president by the United States “limits the support from shareholders that the president of the World Bank needs to enact bold reforms.” The result is that the World Bank remains “largely stuck in an operational model of providing country-specific loans and grants” that have grown increasingly irrelevant to the central objective of the Bank: eliminating global poverty.

A second reason the Bank is seen as beholden to the United States is the perceived success that the United States has had in influencing Bank policy through its legislature, particularly through the Congress’s “power of the purse.” This effect has been particularly significant vis-a-vis International Development Association (IDA) funding. Every three years when IDA appropriation are negotiated, the United States Congress is given the ability to use US funds as leverage and place demands on the Bank. Although the impact of these demands is perhaps overstated by some, there are several examples which affirm the belief that the US Congress exerts a degree of influence over the formulation of Bank policy. One such example is when, in 1993, the House of Representatives authorizing committee chair “told Bank management that the US contribution to. . .IDA 10 would not be forthcoming,” unless the Bank adopted a “public informational disclosure policy.” More recently, during IDA 14, the United States made numerous demands for policies to ensure “results measurement” in IDA lending, including the empowerment of the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) process. During this round, the US also pushed for “an increased amount of IDA funds dedicated to private sector development,” which were ultimately agreed upon. 

There have also been several instances in which the US Congress influenced Bank policy by attempting to mandate how US executive directors could vote. Examples include the passage of the 1972 Gonzales Amendment, which prohibited US executive directors from “voting in favor of use of foreign aid to countries where US private property had been expropriated by the national government,” and when, in 1978, the Congress mandated executive “opposition to all loans for the production of export commodities that were in surplus on the world market” and could thus negatively impact US producers. Further examples include when, in 1989, Representative Nancy Pelosi sponsored an amendment requiring US executive directors to “abstain from any vote that would have a significant impact on the environment and did not make publicly accessible an environmental assessment. . .at least 120 days prior to the board’s vote.” It is important to note that the vote of the the US executive director is “rarely blocks a board decision,” thus, Congressional decisions do not necessarily translate to Bank policy. Additionally, Congressional perspectives on the Bank are, presumably, arrived at on the basis of the interests of their constituents, thus amounting to a democratic expression of how some segment of the world population believes the Bank ought to behave. However, certain features of the board’s distribution of power favor the United States disproportionately and thus lend validity to the notion that Congressional activism in the realm of World Bank policy might impact the Bank’s operation in a manner that is unfair and undemocratic. Most notably, representation of the United States on the board is vastly disproportionate relative to the large majority of the world. The United States is one of eight countries not grouped into multi-country constituencies. This inequity is exacerbated by the fact that three of the other four most powerful shareholders, Germany, France, and the United Kingdom, have economic interests that frequently align with those of the United States.

A third, less tangible form of Western influence on the Bank is the institution’s neoliberal ideological orientation. Despite claiming to have broadened its approach to one encompassing the so-called “New Consensus” which emerged following the widely perceived delegitimization of the Washington Consensus, there is ample evidence to suggest that a neoliberal perspective remains dominant in the Bank. The Bank continues to promote “the development of financial markets as the central resource allocating mechanism,” rather than promoting government involvement in resource distribution. This is evidenced by the persistence of certain Bank activities, including the dispersal of loans meant to encourage governments to “cut public housing and expand subsidized private mortgage finance,” despite evidence suggesting that loans of this variety tend to generate speculative housing bubbles. The criteria which constitute the Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) formula for scoring borrowing country’s policies and governance. are particularly revealing Current CPIA criteria give greater weight to a country’s adherence to neoliberal fiscal and macroeconomic policy than to other factors that are extremely significant in combatting poverty, including “environmental sustainability,” “gender equality,” and “social protection and labor.”

Some claim that the persistent influence of Washington Consensus thinking on Bank policy, or the Bank’s “paradigm maintenance,” is the result of a totalitarian culture in the institution that does not allow debate and that forces adherence by staff to a narrow ideological line. While evidence that limited, soft pressure is sometimes applied by senior management for the purpose of unifying the Bank’s institutional stance on political and economic issues exists, the notion that there exists a dictatorial ban on dissent is a gross exaggeration of the truth. The two factors that seem most responsible for allowing this “paradigm maintenance” to occur in the bank are the relative homogeneity of Bank staff’s educational, professional, and national backgrounds and the Bank’s ostensible commitment not to intervene in the political affairs of borrower countries.

World Bank staff overwhelmingly claim Western educational institutions as their alma mater. When one considers that 80 percent of senior staff in the World Bank were educated in finance and economics institutions located in the United States and United Kingdom, it is perhaps unsurprising that ideological orientations dominant in the West would dominate in the Bank as well. While this trend is not the result of an intentional effort to cultivate a homogenous staff by hiring on the basis of their educational history or personal ideological perspective, it is likely the result of several other Bank policies. One is that the Bank works “exclusively in English, with no requirement to work in other languages.” The wisdom of this policy could perhaps be argued on the basis of guaranteeing clarity of communication and general cohesiveness of Bank staff. Yet, a strong argument in opposition to it is that allowing the use of languages other than English would expand the pool of potentially talented Bank staff who could lend a diverse range of ideas and perspectives. Additionally, the hypocrisy of an institution claiming to represent the interests of the global community while using only one of the world’s languages is obvious. That the language in question happens to be associated closely with imperialism, first British and later American, should be a concern for any organization that seeks to reform the political and economic structures of the world’s weakest countries. 

A second possible explanation for the Bank’s paradigm maintenance is its tendency to rely most significantly on the work of economists, rather than academics trained in a broader variety of disciplines. Although the Bank can claim to to hire a staff with a relatively broad range of expertise, Bank research output is “dominated by one arm” of the institution: the Development Economics Vice Presidency (DEC).” The “overwhelming majority” DEC researchers are economists by trade. Economics, just as any academic discipline, possesses a unique manner of “examining problems, of defining their essential features, and considering solutions.” In identifying the sources of poverty and formulating global development initiatives, an economic perspective is, for obvious reasons, extremely valuable. Yet, the work of sociologists, anthropologists, historians, ecologists, agrarian scientists, engineers, and others are also of central importance. The complexity of the issue of global poverty, and its interconnectedness to social, historical, cultural and environmental forces, render a comprehensive approach to its eradication necessary.
	
The preponderance of economists in the DEC can likely explained at least partially by the Bank’s ostensible commitment, dating back to its inception, not to involve itself in political affairs of member states. Since its inception, the Bank has “narrowed its range of activities to seemingly ‘neutral’ or technical tasks,” in order to avoid appearing active in the realm of politics. Yet, beginning in the 1990s, with the Bank’s increased focus on good governance and fighting corruption, the Bank began gradually to delve into the sphere of political reform. Evidence of this can be seen in the growth of lending for the purpose of “public sector governance and rule of law reform,” to encompass “close to $39 billion out of the total $92.3 billion in cumulative IBRD and IDA lending” occurring from 1990 to 2006. Thus, as the Bank has expanded its participation in the political sphere, it’s apolitical stance has become only nominal. As evidenced earlier by CPIA criteria, however, it is clear that increased involvement in political reform has not, broadly speaking, corresponded to a concomitant expansion in the non-economic factors most valued by the Bank. 
	
For a variety of reasons, the Bank remains disproportionately influenced by Western interests and ideas. Despite the fact that much of the criticism of the Bank on this count is overstated, and the fact that this influence has subsided somewhat in recent years, it is clear that eliminating the real and imagined sources of these criticisms would do much for the Bank.


Changes to the Bank must make its governing structure more equitable, enhance the transparency of its operations and increase the national, ideological and professional diversity of its staff. A reform which would do a great deal to make the Bank’s governing structure more democratic would be the introduction of double majority voting. In order for an executive board decision to pass under a double majority system, the majority of votes on the basis of voting power and also the majority in a “popular vote” in which each country is represented individually, would be required. Such a system would continue to take IBRD shareholder size into account while also allowing for the popular opinion of the international community to serve as a check. Such a change would be far more representative of the will of the entire World Bank membership as it would allow countries to vote in opposition to the other members of their constituencies and would impose a significant hurdle to Western-dominated decision making. 

Another helpful change would be to shrink the maximum size of country constituencies and consolidating the European seats into one constituency. This would increase the total number of constituencies, enhancing the potential for constituency countries to oppose non-constituency countries, and also allow for constituencies to vote in a manner more accurately reflective of the countries composing them. A significant result of such a reconfiguration of voting power in the Executive Board would be that constituency countries would have a greater voice in selecting the World Bank president. As country representation on the Executive Board increases, so will the number of possible presidential nominees and the ability for previously marginalized countries and constituencies to assert their approval or disapproval of candidates. Such a change, coupled with a statement by the Bank disavowing its tradition of allowing the United States to appoint its President unilaterally and advocating broader participation in the selection process, would address a great deal of the criticism currently levied against the Bank. These reforms would also dilute the potential for the US Congress, or for any legislature or interest group, to have a disproportionate influence on the formulation of Bank policy.

The Bank has taken numerous steps in recent years to increase the transparency of its operations and dispel the conception of the Bank as a monolithic organization. Such steps, including the publication of Project Appraisal Documents and Impact Evaluations, should be expanded upon. This might include publishing documents circulated internally and voting results from Executive Board meetings and increasing access to the decision-making process behind the development of CPIA criteria. Such changes would allow the public greater insight into the mechanisms driving World Bank actions, eliminating the basis for much of the groundless criticism directed toward the Bank and enhancing the ability for academics and policy makers outside of the Bank to develop potentially helpful policy reform initiatives. 

A preliminary step that the Bank can take in order to increase the ideological, professional, and national diversity of its staff would be to drop its commitment, long since abandoned in practice, to conduct itself entirely apolitically. As stated earlier, the Bank has already assumed a significant role in the politics of many of its member states. Eliminating this self-imposed hurdle to development would increase the range of policy initiatives that the Bank could engage in, allowing the Bank to develop a far more comprehensive approach to tackling such intractable issues as corruption and inefficient taxation. As the Bank’s range of initiatives increases, so will its demand for researchers trained in disciplines other than economics. Broader incorporation of sociological, historical, anthropological and ecological perspectives would likely have the dual effect of attracting staff from a more diverse set of educational and national backgrounds, and of tempering the persistence of the Bank’s neoliberal ideological outlook. If this change were complemented by hiring quotas on the basis of nationality, the range of perspectives that would contribute to research and policy formulation would be greatly expanded. Quotas might also increase the extent to which Bank programs would be tailored to address the needs of specific communities, an especially important consideration if the Bank is to assume an increased role in advising political reforms. 
